Textbook: Business Decision-Making, © 2025 Michael Baumtrog, Chris MacDonald & Hasko von Kriegstein
For use only in BUS221, Toronto Metropolitan University.
Posting, uploading, copying, or distribution anywhere without permission is forbidden.
ct4biz2022
----------------------------
1
Beliefs and Claims
Introduction
In this chapter we will begin by exploring the creation of claims. We will then look at the
connection between claims and beliefs. We’ll conclude this chapter by spending some time
explaining why the justification of our beliefs and the acceptability of claims is the right
standard for evaluating premises. Building on that foundation we’ll discuss how various
types of claims can meet the standard of acceptability. ‘
Claims and Creative Thinking
Where do claims come from? In this class, the claims you analyze and evaluate are often
created by your instructor. You see claims presented in class, or claims placed in tests and
assignments, all of which originated in the mind of your instructor. In other words, claims
are created.
To create a claim, or anything else, requires a seldom discussed skill: creativity. Like any
other skill, you can improve your creativity with practice, and it can fade if neglected for
too long. In this section, we will briefly discuss how creativity can be applied to reasoning
and argumentation as we have discussed it this far in the course.
Recall that a claim is a statement regarding some matter of fact. Or, to put it a slightly
different way, a claim is an attempt at describing some part of the world, and that in an
argument both premises and conclusions are claims. This means that both the conclusions
we believe and the reasons we believe them need to come from somewhere.
In the business context, you will often be the person responsible for creating claims when
you prepare arguments about what to do. For example, you may need to provide direction
to your department regarding the activities they will undertake for the next quarter. This
would require you to provide them with a conclusion about what to do, which is supported
by reasons/premises for why they should be doing those things. But, how can we come up
with reasons and conclusions?
There are many methods available for improving your creative thinking, several of which
involve activities like brainstorming and discussing with other people. In this class, we will
provide one such simple activity called the ECO approach to creating claims. We use
“ECO” as an acronym to bring forward three very common considerations.
1. What Evidence for the topic should be considered?
2. What would a Community of experts have to say?
Textbook: Business Decision-Making, © 2025 Michael Baumtrog, Chris MacDonald & Hasko von Kriegstein
For use only in BUS221, Toronto Metropolitan University.
Posting, uploading, copying, or distribution anywhere without permission is forbidden.
ct4biz2022
----------------------------
2
3. What Objections can you anticipate?
These questions can be asked in almost any decision-making context. When thinking about
the direction your department should take next quarter, considering the first question about
the available evidence might have you looking at spending levels from previous quarters,
and coming to claims such as “We spent less than our budget last quarter”. Considering
question 2 might have you come to claims such as “Experts suggest hiring when the best
candidates are available.” And considering question 3 might have you come to a an
argument like “Even though no one else is hiring right now, we should because it means
the best candidates are unexpectedly available now.”
As you can see from these examples, the third consideration takes an extra step. It asks you
first to anticipate an objection someone might make toward your thinking and then provide
your response. The idea is that doing so allows you to come to a reason to present before
any one actually makes the objection in real life. In this way, you can give a reason that
prevents them from ever coming to the objection.
Taken together, using all three claims just mentioned, we may come the following
argument
P1. We spent less than our budget last quarter.
P2. Experts say we should hire when the best candidates are available.
P3. The best candidates are unexpectedly available now.
C. We should focus on hiring next quarter.
This is just one example, but try using the ECO approach for any decision you are
pondering, and you will see it provides a quick and easy way to start generating
considerations and claims applicable to your decision making. Should you study this
weekend? What evidence do you have to suggest you should or shouldn’t? What would the
best students say? Why might some people say you shouldn’t study and how would you
respond?
While the ECO approach provides a quick and easy method for generating reasons, you
may have noticed that it is founded on a more basic strategy that when developed can help
you far beyond the ECO approach. That strategy is coming up with good questions.
The ECO approach provides you with 3 strong questions for generating reasons because of
the way the questions are designed. But what makes a question stronger or weaker for this
purpose?
Textbook: Business Decision-Making, © 2025 Michael Baumtrog, Chris MacDonald & Hasko von Kriegstein
For use only in BUS221, Toronto Metropolitan University.
Posting, uploading, copying, or distribution anywhere without permission is forbidden.
ct4biz2022
----------------------------
3
Contemporary scholars studying questions tend to divide them into two broad categories:
1) exam questions, and 2) inquiry questions. Both question are very important but have
notably difference characteristics making them best fit to serve different purposes.
Exam questions are questions that test a person's knowledge. They are often questions that
seek confirmation about a fact, can be in a true-or-false format, multiple choice, or if open
ended be seeking a specific answer. These kinds of questions can be very important when,
for example, you are determining whether someone should be given a driver’s licence.
Before someone gets behind the wheel of a car, you want to be sure that they know enough
about the rules and laws of driving, as well as how to operate a motor vehicle to be able to
start driving safely.
Inquiry questions, on the other hand, are typically open-ended, stimulate thinking, and spur
further questions and discussion. These questions do not seek to test or confirm knowledge,
but to inspire further thinking, which is what makes them great for inspiring the creation
of reasons. If you look back at the questions posed in the ECO approach, you will see that
they take the shape of inquiry question rather than exam questions. Our point here is that
you don’t have to be limited to the ECO questions – coming up with your own inquiry
questions based on your decision-making situation can help you generate even more and
better reasons for that context so it is worth practicing asking good inquiry questions
Beliefs
Whether true or false, we all have countless beliefs, which we express in many different
ways. Sometimes, we express them as quite formal claims, I believe it is true that X.
Sometimes, we say I think X. Sometimes, we simply say X is true or even just X! The
following sentences, for example, all express the same belief:
• I believe it’s true that Apple will be profitable next year.
• I believe that Apple will be profitable next year.
• I think Apple will be profitable next year.
• Apple will be profitable next year.
In many cases, we have beliefs we don’t express at all; we don’t put them into words but
simply act on them. When you step out of the way of an oncoming car, you do so because
you believe that the car is a danger to you, even if you never explicitly say or think That
car is dangerous. You don’t think it, but you do believe it.
Textbook: Business Decision-Making, © 2025 Michael Baumtrog, Chris MacDonald & Hasko von Kriegstein
For use only in BUS221, Toronto Metropolitan University.
Posting, uploading, copying, or distribution anywhere without permission is forbidden.
ct4biz2022
----------------------------
4
In fact, you have many beliefs you’ve never thought about. For example, you believe
298,678 is a bigger number than 142,901, don’t you? Of course you do—now that we
mention it—even though you’ve never given the question a moment’s thought. And surely
you believe that it will be dark in Vilnius at two o’clock in the morning (local time) on
January 12, 2039, although you’ve never thought about it or said it out loud. And you
believe that you’ve never been to Neptune, even though the thought has probably never
occurred to you (until now). These are things you’d agree are true, but you haven’t had
reason to think about them before. The list of beliefs we hold is endless. And at least
sometimes, the quality of those beliefs matters a lot. Some of those beliefs will affect
whether you succeed or fail in business. Others could even save your life. So, it’s important
to think critically about just what you believe, and about whether those beliefs are
reasonable. And that means thinking it through and considering the evidence. It doesn’t
make sense to believe things automatically, or by default.
If believing something doesn’t require saying it out loud or even consciously thinking about
it, what exactly is involved in believing something? Simplifying somewhat, we can say
that to believe X is to be disposed to think that X is true. In other words, if you were to ask
yourself whether X is true, you’d think Yes, X is true. For now, this will be our working
definition of belief. Next, we need to look at the content of our beliefs: What kinds of things
can take the place of X in our formulas above (X is true, I believe X, and so forth)? The
answer to this question is that X always stands for some claim.
Claims
We have been using the concept of a claim for a while now. But let’s look at it a bit more
carefully. Whenever we think through a decision, or try to convince someone else of
something, we generally make use of various claims. If I say, There are lots of Italian
restaurants in Toronto, so it would be foolish to open a new one! I’ve put forward two
different claims: first I’ve claimed that there are lots of Italian restaurants in Toronto, and
then I’ve claimed that it would be foolish to open a new one. Claims are the essential
components of arguments and decisions.
Everyone has an intuitive understanding of what it means to make a claim, but here, we’ll
get somewhat more technical about it.
A claim is a statement regarding some matter of fact. Or, to put it a slightly different way,
a claim is an attempt at describing some part of the world. These are all examples of claims:
• Ishani has dark hair.
• Canada is in North America.
Textbook: Business Decision-Making, © 2025 Michael Baumtrog, Chris MacDonald & Hasko von Kriegstein
For use only in BUS221, Toronto Metropolitan University.
Posting, uploading, copying, or distribution anywhere without permission is forbidden.
ct4biz2022
----------------------------
5
• I’m in the Northern Hemisphere right now.
• Riga is a beautiful city.
• I’m hungry!
• I’m not hungry!
• Sanjiv doesn’t drink coffee.
• Antonios is an accounting major.
• It’s usually hot in Canada in February.
Those are all claims, but note that the last claim about Canada is false. Most of Canada is
typically quite cold in February. This highlights the fact that a claim doesn’t have to be
true in order to count as a claim—it just has to be put forward as a statement of fact. The
claim that It’s usually hot in Canada in February is a false claim—anyone making this
claim is either joking, lying, or uninformed about Canadian weather—but it’s still a claim.
Importantly, part of the definition of a claim is that while it might be either true or false, it
must be capable of being one or the other. So, while Water is blue is a claim, the question
Is water blue? isn’t a claim. A question is neither true nor false; the answer to a question
can be either true or false, but the question itself is neither. Similarly, a command like Get
out of my way! is neither true nor false, so it doesn’t count as a claim. The same goes for
exclamations that express an attitude, like Booooo! or Yay! When someone says Yay! it
might be based on a belief that’s either true or false, but Yay! itself simply expresses
happiness. It’s not a claim about anything at all.
Note also that you can consider or express a claim without actually asserting it yourself—
that is to say, we may mention a claim without intending to present it as true. This is, in
fact, an essential tool of critical thinking. Sometimes, we put forward a claim
hypothetically, as part of a thought experiment. For example, you might ask, “If Martha
says Dave isn’t qualified, then why did she hire him?” In such a case, you’re not asserting
that Dave isn’t qualified; rather, you’re reporting what Martha asserted, and asking why,
given what she said about him, she still hired him.
Consider, too, that we quite often make claims in which other claims are embedded, and
those embedded claims aren’t being asserted by the speaker themselves. For instance, you
might say, “If our market research indicates significant consumer demand, then we will be
ready to move forward.” In that case, you aren’t asserting that your market research will
indicate significant consumer demand, or that you will be ready to move forward; rather,
you’re making a claim about how these two other claims are related to each other. As
another example of a claim within a claim, one might say, “My friend Dominic thinks
Montreal is the prettiest city in Canada.” Dominic’s claim (that Montreal is Canada’s
Textbook: Business Decision-Making, © 2025 Michael Baumtrog, Chris MacDonald & Hasko von Kriegstein
For use only in BUS221, Toronto Metropolitan University.
Posting, uploading, copying, or distribution anywhere without permission is forbidden.
ct4biz2022
----------------------------
6
prettiest city) is mentioned, but not asserted by the speaker themselves. The speaker’s claim
says nothing about Montreal; rather, it says something about Dominic. So, if it turns out
that Montreal isn’t the prettiest city in Canada, the speaker hasn’t said anything wrong. If,
on the other hand, it turns out that Dominic never made this claim about Montreal, then the
speaker’s claim about Dominic would be false.
In evaluating premises, we’re generally interested in the claims the arguer themselves is
asserting. So, when we find embedded claims that aren’t being asserted, we’ve not yet
identified the correct target of our scrutiny. We need to figure out which claims the arguer
actually wants us to believe to be true. It’s those claims (however complex) that constitute
the arguer’s premises.
Evaluating Claims
Once we have our claims, it often matters a great deal whether a particular claim is true.
As an entrepreneur, for example, you can’t make a smart decision about investing your
time and energy inventing or designing a new product—say, an iPhone app, an electric
bicycle, or a new kind of waterproof fabric—without a clear and accurate understanding of
the potential demand for that product. As a manager, you can’t make good decisions about
whom to hire without knowing about the skills and experience of the various candidates.
As a consumer, you can’t make a smart decision about buying an extended warranty on a
new piece of electronics without knowing approximately how likely the product is to break
down within the first few years you own it. For that matter, you can’t make good decisions
about your own education and career if you don’t have accurate information, including
information about yourself. What are your strengths and weaknesses? Do you like
numbers? Are you good at math? Do you have a special talent for finance? For marketing?
For leadership? In order to answer any of these questions, you need to evaluate various
claims that might be offered as potential answers.
It’s important to think critically about what you know—or rather about what you think you
know—because at least some of the things you “know” aren’t actually true. You believe
them, but you don’t know them. Many people thought, in 2010, that BlackBerry had a
bright future as a manufacturer of smartphones. That turned out not to be the case. Maybe
you believe, as many people do, that cutting body-hair makes it grow faster (not true). Or
perhaps you believe that drinking “oxygenated” water is especially good for you (there’s
no evidence of this). Or that bats are blind (not true at all!).
Thus, we need to be able to evaluate claims, whether they are our own claims or claims put
forward by someone else. And when we evaluate a claim, we aren’t evaluating its beauty,
or whether it makes us happy, or whether the underlying belief is firmly held. Instead, when
Textbook: Business Decision-Making, © 2025 Michael Baumtrog, Chris MacDonald & Hasko von Kriegstein
For use only in BUS221, Toronto Metropolitan University.
Posting, uploading, copying, or distribution anywhere without permission is forbidden.
ct4biz2022
----------------------------
7
we evaluate a claim, we’re asking whether we are (or would be) justified in believing it. If
you believe a claim, you accept it (as a potential reason for action, or a premise in an
argument, for example). But what makes a claim acceptable?
Justification and the Standard of Acceptability
A particular claim is acceptable, if it’s reasonable to believe it. In other words, one is
justified in believing that claim. But why should this matter? After all, what’s important is
that we base our decisions and opinions on claims that are true, regardless of whether we’re
justified in believing them. And, clearly, there are cases where we can reasonably believe
something even though it turns out to be false. Imagine that on the first day of a new job,
two of your new colleagues tell you that the whole office usually breaks for lunch at noon.
You believe them, but it turns out to be part of a prank. This is a case where you justifiably
believed a false claim. The opposite is also possible: Consider that, prior to the 2014 FIFA
World Cup semi-final between Brazil and Germany, there were a handful of people who
predicted that Germany would win 7-1 (some even put money on it). This turned out to be
true, but there is no way that these people were justified in their belief.
However, while truth is ultimately the standard that matters, it’s not a practical standard to
use, since we cannot directly pursue truth. If I were to advise you to believe only and all
true claims, I wouldn’t be offering any concrete guidance. Justification, on the other hand,
can be pursued. Telling you to believe only when your belief is justified does tell you what
to do: seek out reliable sources, weigh the evidence carefully, etc.
An additional worry is that truth is a big word. It can imply such a high standard that it’s
not clear we could ever meet it. After all, how could we ever be really certain—absolutely
certain—that a claim is true? One could almost always think up a skeptical scenario that
would invalidate even the most commonplace certainties. For example, if you own a car,
you probably think you know where it is parked right now. But to know this with absolute
certainty, you’d have to rule out that it has been stolen—and you wouldn’t know if it had
been, so how can you be sure? Or how do you know that parking your car where you think
you did wasn’t part of a dream you’re still dreaming? Or that you’re not hooked up to an
entirely artificial reality, like the characters in the movie The Matrix? All of these are
worthy questions for a philosophy class or a quiet moment of reflection, but they’re best
put aside while conducting your daily affairs. When you see a car rushing towards you, it’s
not wise to occupy yourself with philosophical reflections. You need to jump out of the
way now.
Another advantage of thinking in terms of acceptability instead of truth is that the question
of whether a claim is acceptable can be refined by specifying the context in which this
Textbook: Business Decision-Making, © 2025 Michael Baumtrog, Chris MacDonald & Hasko von Kriegstein
For use only in BUS221, Toronto Metropolitan University.
Posting, uploading, copying, or distribution anywhere without permission is forbidden.
ct4biz2022
----------------------------
8
question is to be answered. Suppose you’re wondering whether to use a particular claim as
a premise in an argument. Whether this is a good idea depends, in part, on the audience
you’re presenting your argument to. Are the people you’re trying to convince
knowledgeable about the topic? If so, you can assume they’ll readily believe bits of
specialized knowledge that you’d have to argue for in front of a lay audience. Or are you
facing an audience that’s known to be extremely skeptical of certain claims you need for
your argument? In that case, you should be prepared to offer additional reasons for
accepting those claims. So, unlike the question of whether a claim is true, the question of
whether a claim is acceptable can be refined by specifying to whom it would be acceptable.
When we engage others in argument or deliberation, our starting point doesn’t have to be
just truth, it has to be common ground—a claim, or set of claims, that everyone involved
finds acceptable.
Note also that, in making arguments, it’s not always necessary to establish your own
claims. Sometimes, you may be content if you’ve shifted the burden of proof. Imagine
you’re trying to convince your boss to start a promotion by giving free merchandise to
students enrolled at the local college. Your boss may demand you prove that the increased
publicity would outweigh the costs of the campaign. Since you can’t predict the future, this
will be difficult to do. But you may argue that three other companies have done similar
campaigns with great success and that even your own company reaped great rewards from
such a campaign ten years ago. Of course, this doesn’t prove that the suggested campaign
will be successful. But it does shift the burden of proof. You’ve provided enough evidence
to make it reasonable to accept your claim. Now, instead of you having to show that the
campaign absolutely will be a success, your boss is the one who needs to show how this
proposed campaign is different from all the successful ones that came before. Either that
or your boss should accept your point of view.
Strictly speaking, every claim is either true or false, but this isn’t always the most useful
way to think about claims. Sometimes, it’s better to ask how close to the truth a claim is—
in other words, how accurate it is. For example, suppose your car’s speedometer says
you’re going 95 km/h. That’s probably not your true speed—not exactly. Speedometers in
most cars only measure speed plus or minus a few percent, so when it says you’re going
95 km/h, you may really be going 93 or 97 km/h. But there’s not much point in calling the
95 km/h reading false in a case like this (of course, if it says 95 when you’re parked, then
the reading is clearly false!). It’s more useful to think in terms of degrees of accuracy, to
recognize that every gauge or measuring device has some margin of error, and to use the
information in a way that recognizes this.
Textbook: Business Decision-Making, © 2025 Michael Baumtrog, Chris MacDonald & Hasko von Kriegstein
For use only in BUS221, Toronto Metropolitan University.
Posting, uploading, copying, or distribution anywhere without permission is forbidden.
ct4biz2022
----------------------------
9
This brings us to the question of the efficiency of information gathering, and how much
effort you should expend in improving the accuracy of your information. Why do
speedometers only measure speed to within plus or minus a few percent? Car
manufacturers could engineer more precise speedometers, so why don’t they? The answer
is that no one really needs to know with that much precision just how fast they’re going.
You just need to know that you’re going a safe speed and aren’t deviating too much from
the posted speed limit, and the speedometers in today’s cars are accurate enough to do that.
More precise measurement would likely be more expensive, and the added accuracy
wouldn’t be useful enough to justify the cost. Thus, spending more resources to gather
more accurate information would be inefficient.
This line of thought applies in many situations. Imagine you need to know how many eggs
are in the fridge. A quick glance tells you that there are a bunch, maybe ten or so. That’s
not very precise, but it’s close enough to tell you that you don’t need to go to the store
before starting to make omelets for two people. So you don’t need to stop to do a careful
count. “Ten or so” is good enough. Of course, not all cases turn out that way. Sometimes,
increasing the accuracy of our information is important enough to justify substantial efforts.
Suppose your company is developing a new pregnancy-test kit and the scientists say that
in its current stage, the kit has an accuracy rate of “about 99%.” This won’t do. Most
existing test kits have an accuracy rate of at least 99%. So before you submit your kit for
approval to the relevant authorities (which tends to be a very costly process), you need to
be sure that the accuracy is at least that high. If it turns out that the actual figure is 97%,
that would be disastrous. No will want a pregnancy test that’s merely 97% accurate.
A final advantage of talking about acceptability and justification instead of truth is that it
makes it easier to see that, to a very significant extent, we’re responsible for what we
believe—that is, if we believe things we have no justification for believing, we’re to blame.
There are several reasons why this is important. At one level, we might say that believing
a claim for which there is no good justification is both lazy and wasteful. We humans have
truly amazing brains capable of contemplating claims in the abstract, considering all the
evidence for and against, and coming to conclusions. We may well be the only species on
the planet capable of that. Letting that power go to waste is a shame. In other cases, a failure
to look for justification can be downright dangerous. Relying without justification on a
claim such as This vaccine can prevent Ebola could have horrific consequences. And
unjustifiedly relying on the claim This investment is guaranteed to pay off big! could be
financially devastating. To believe claims like these without looking at them very carefully
is seriously unwise.
Textbook: Business Decision-Making, © 2025 Michael Baumtrog, Chris MacDonald & Hasko von Kriegstein
For use only in BUS221, Toronto Metropolitan University.
Posting, uploading, copying, or distribution anywhere without permission is forbidden.
ct4biz2022
----------------------------
10
In still other cases, failure to look for justification is ethically irresponsible, constituting a
failure to do your duty or to live up to other people’s reasonable expectations. If a
company’s balance sheet claims a particular level of income, and if you, as a financial
auditor, don’t verify the details carefully, the investing public could be misled and you are
guilty of failing in your professional obligations. If you’re responsible for purchasing new
computers for your employer, and the computer company’s claims about the capacity of
those computers turn out to be false, you can fairly be accused of having let your employer
down in a significant way. In both cases, doing what’s right requires that you question the
claims that have been put before you and that you do some work to establish whether
they’re acceptable.
Having established the importance of measuring the premises of an argument against the
standard of acceptability and justification, we will now take a closer look at various ways
in which claims can be justified.
Justification by Argument
One crucial way a claim can be justified is by being the conclusion of a strong argument.
It’s difficult to overstate the importance of this way of justifying claims. This whole course
is effectively about how we use good arguments to justify our beliefs, especially when
those beliefs ground our decisions. But, of course, every argument relies on premises that
are themselves claims. And how are those claims justified? One possibility would be to
provide (or find) arguments for each premise. We would then have what we call a layered
argument – basically, an argument in which the premises that support our main conclusion
are themselves supported by further premises. This is an important practice, and we should
be prepared to do it more often than we do. We all unthinkingly accept plenty of claims
we’d be hard-pressed to justify in the face of someone who genuinely didn’t believe them.
(That’s what often makes political disagreements seem so intractable). However, even if
we provide an argument for each claim, the claims that provide the premises for those
arguments may themselves need to be argued for. We can’t go on like that forever; at some
point, we need to rely on some claims as premises to start with. We’ll call premises that
aren’t argued for from further premises basic premises. There are various ways that basic
premises can be justified; these are basic sources of justification. We will look at those in
detail in the next reading.